MeMories

and

MoMentuM

evolution of a southern California CoMMuter rail systeM


<!----##SPLITTER##-->
15 Years of Growth
Metrolink has journeyed a long way since the first train departed the station on Oct. 26, 1992. An eventful 15 years later, we celebrate a landmark birthday. As we prepared to commemorate it, we rifled through photos, clippings and mementos illustrating our conception as a brand-new Southern California commuter rail service, then our infancy, rapid growth and maturation. We identified key events, confident we could learn from history as we contemplate the future. Some lessons are evident. Metrolink was born because Southern California residents demanded commuter rail and voted for public money to fund it. We grow because Metrolink is part of a sensible solution to community traffic woes. Metrolink proved its value as a public asset by meeting challenge after challenge: the remarkable creation of a brand-new commuter rail service in less than two years; a stunningly quick service expansion in response to the Northridge earthquake; and an aggressive safety program, including ordering cutting-edge rail cars incorporating new Crash Energy Management techniques. Our history is rich with achievements. Metrolink initiated service at 11 stations and now stops at 55. Metrolink trains first ran on three routes but now operate on seven. Average weekday ridership hit 5,399 in Metrolink’s first year while today an average weekday finds more than 44,000 people reading, working, chatting and relaxing on our trains. Although much happened in the few key years that preceded Metrolink’s existence and our 15 years of operation, we highlight and celebrate 15 events that mark significant moments in Metrolink’s past and signal what lies ahead. Like any parent, we are proud of every first step, growth spurt and accomplishment.

Ron Roberts, Chairman of the Board

2


<!----##SPLITTER##-->
BIRTH OF COMMUTER RAIL
1988-1990—Voters sent the first signal that Southern California might be ready for commuter rail. They backed county salestax measures to fund transportation improvements, specifically including commuter rail. Riverside County voters spoke decisively in 1988, San Bernardino County voters seconded the motion in 1989, and residents of Los Angeles and Orange counties made it a majority vote in 1990. State bond funds also were on their way. Southern California public agencies had both the money and public support to bring commuter rail to life.

1988-1990

3


<!----##SPLITTER##-->
BIRTH of COMMUTER RAIL

1989-1990—Rail systems require tracks and lots of them. Southern Pacific Railroad put its rail rights-of-way up for sale in 1989 and negotiations with Southern Pacific and Santa Fe railroads began in earnest in 1990. Ultimately, public agencies acquired track and trackage rights for more than 450 route miles from three railroads – Union Pacific, Southern Pacific and Santa Fe. Southern California commuter rail was taking shape.

1989-1990
1991—Transportation and elected officials from five Southern California counties – Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino and Ventura – worked together on commuter rail, ordering blueand-white passenger cars in January. The official governing structure, the Southern California Regional Rail Authority, debuted in August with an emphasis on regional planning tempered by local control. This gave the communities served a strong voice in decisions made about the public rail system. By November, this embryonic service had a name – Metrolink.

1991

4


<!----##SPLITTER##-->
FIRST STEPS
1992—Metrolink was born on Oct. 26 when a period of hectic planning, purchasing and building culminated in Southern California’s new commuter rail service. Commuters, train buffs and officials jostled to board the new trains. Service began on three abbreviated lines – the Ventura County Line, Santa Clarita Line and San Bernardino Line – with peak-period trains traveling into Los Angeles in the morning and back to residential communities in the afternoon. Metrolink started small but was destined to grow.

1992

5


<!----##SPLITTER##-->
First Steps
1993—Fewer than eight months after Metrolink service started, frustrated Riverside commuters boarded trains on the new Riverside Line on June 14. They were happy to escape worsening freeway congestion by climbing into comfortable blue-andwhite passenger cars carrying them from downtown Riverside, Ontario and Pomona to Los Angeles. By this time, additional San Bernardino Line stations opened, too. More and more Inland Empire commuters left their vehicles behind to travel by rail.

1993
1994—The ground shook on Jan. 17, dealing a sharp blow to Southern California transportation. The Northridge earthquake toppled freeway bridges and played havoc with commutes. Metrolink mobilized to add trains, extend routes, create stations and lay new track, using every possible resource, including the Army Corps of Engineers and Navy Seabees. Within one week, a new station opened in Lancaster, extending the Antelope Valley Line far beyond its Santa Clarita termination. Daily Antelope Valley ridership rocketed from about 900 to more than 8,000 passengers. Within one month, the Ventura County Line extended past Moorpark to Camarillo, then seven weeks later to Oxnard. Metrolink opened at least a station a week for a month after the temblor, to much praise from the public and elected officials such as U.S. Sen. Dianne Feinstein. Commuters facing one-way driving nightmares as long as four hours gratefully boarded packed trains to speed to work. 6


<!----##SPLITTER##-->
First Steps
1994—On March 28, passengers flocked to Metrolink’s Orange County Line, a major extension southward. Before Metrolink arrived, Orange County commuters enjoyed a rail option – a single round-trip commuter train and Amtrak trains geared to leisure travel. But Metrolink trains delivered more stops and more service. This new Oceanside-to-LA line was the first to link three counties – Los Angeles, Orange and San Diego – and its longest at that time, 87 miles long. To this day, it remains one of Metrolink’s busiest lines. Metrolink continued to grow, providing the service Southern California communities needed.

1994

7


<!----##SPLITTER##-->
Growing Up Quickly
1995—When the San Bernardino Line introduced Saturday Explorer service on Sept. 8, it pioneered the concept of weekend service, including special trains, summer excursions and regular weekend service. Today, nearly 9,000 Saturday and Sunday riders visit beaches at San Clemente Pier and Oceanside, take a train and shuttle to Disneyland or Angels’ Stadium, or board special trains to destinations such as the California Speedway in Fontana. Some weekend riders even convert to weekday passengers. 1997—Metrolink’s Holiday Toy Express premiered during the holiday season, delivering merriment to communities all over the Metrolink system and collecting unwrapped toys for underprivileged children. Studded with 50,000 twinkling lights, decorated with holiday displays and transporting Santa Claus, the Holiday Toy Express celebrated its 10th anniversary in 2006.
TM TM

1995

1997

2001
2001—Recognizing continuing demand for Inland Empire transportation alternatives, Metrolink opened the 91 Line in May to link downtown Riverside, Corona, Fullerton and downtown Los Angeles. The line shared track with the Inland EmpireOrange County Line until the West Corona Station, when the train headed west to LA. Metrolink was hitting its stride. 8

1995—The nation’s first suburb-tosuburb commuter rail line debuted Oct. 2, carrying commuters on the new Inland Empire-Orange County Line. Its success was predictable: the train passed bumper-locked vehicles along the parallel Riverside (91) Freeway as passengers relaxed on their way from Riverside and Corona area homes to Orange County jobs.


<!----##SPLITTER##-->
Striding Forward
2002—On Sept. 1, Metrolink, Amtrak and Caltrans introduced the Rail 2 Rail program allowing Metrolink monthly passholders and Amtrak ticketholders to ride any Amtrak or Metrolink train within the limits of their ticket, including weekend trains, at no extra cost. With this step, the public agencies moved toward seamless train commuting. 2006—The arrival of Metrolink’s 100 millionth passenger nearly a year earlier than expected on Oct. 26 was a clear sign of the commuter rail system’s soaring ridership. Andrew Sanchez of Van Nuys stepped off a Metrolink train in Anaheim and pushed total system ridership since opening day 14 years before into nine digits for the first time. More than 40,000 passengers now board on an average weekday.

2002
2005—In the wake of the Glendale crash, Metrolink initiated the Sealed Corridor Program to implement dramatic crossing improvements in addition to the $72 million already invested. This $100 million program reduces the opportunity for accidents even further. With a 2007 groundbreaking on the first projects, Metrolink became the first U.S. commuter rail agency to apply sealed-corridor methods to a densely populated urban area. 9

2005

2006

2006—Leading in safety technology, Metrolink was the first commuter rail agency to order passenger and cab cars incorporating recently developed Crash Energy Management techniques. These combine to enhance crashworthiness by turning the rail cars into giant shock absorbers. The 87-car order starts arriving by mid-2009. In a mere 15 years, Metrolink evolved from a spunky public start-up to a sophisticated, full-service commuter rail system for communities all over Southern California.


<!----##SPLITTER##-->
Letter from CEO David Solow
Every station that lies ahead is just as important as those already visited. In fact, elected officials, transportation agencies and employees work every day to ensure that Metrolink trains arrive on time, safely and with the best equipment available. Metrolink’s achievements today are significant. We remove nearly 25,000 vehicles from the road every weekday. Metrolink trains add the equivalent of an entire lane on adjacent freeways during the peak rush hour. Metrolink also dispatches more than 100 cargo trains daily, ensuring goods and people share the tracks safely. But Metrolink’s future potential is vast. Just ahead for Metrolink is the arrival of next-generation Crash Energy Management (CEM) equipment. By mid-2009, the first CEM cars in an order of 53 cab cars and 54 passenger cars will begin arriving, enhancing the already-sturdy crashworthiness of rail cars. Metrolink also will see the first of 15 new locomotives arrive in the train yard by this year’s end. Metrolink anticipates some exciting service expansions, too, in the years to come – adding new Perris-to-Riverside and Redlands-toSan Bernardino lines as well as increasing Orange County service to 30-minute intervals. More equipment and more service mean more passengers. Metrolink expects weekday ridership to increase by about 6,000 passengers by 2010 and by as much as another 25,000 passengers by 2015. By 2020, Metrolink ridership could more than double what it is today. Just as there have been remarkable milestones in the past 15 years of Metrolink’s existence, we intend to set new records and meet new challenges in the next 15 years.

10


<!----##SPLITTER##-->
Fifteen years of growth

11


<!----##SPLITTER##-->
2007 Board of Directors
MEMBERS
Ron Roberts (Chair, SCRRA Board) Council Member, City of Temecula

ALTERNATES
Daryl Busch Mayor, City of Perris John Chlebnik Mayor , City of Calimesa

MEMBERS
Patrick Morris Mayor, City of San Bernardino Paul Eaton Mayor, City of Montclair

ALTERNATES
Patricia Gilbreath Mayor Pro Tem, City of Redlands Diane Williams Mayor Pro Tem, City of Rancho Cucamonga

Riverside County Transportation Commission (RCTC)
Frank West Council Member, City of Moreno Valley

San Bernardino Associated Governments (SANBAG)

Ventura County Transportation Commission (VCTC)
Keith Millhouse (Vice-Chair, SCRRA Board) Council Member, City of Moorpark

Brian Humphrey VCTC Commission Member

Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA)
Art Brown Council Member, City of Buena Park

Patricia Bates Supervisor, 5th District County of Orange Board of Supervisors

Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (LACMTA)
Anthony J. Bejarano Council Member, City of Baldwin Park Michael Antonovich Supervisor, 5th District, County of Los Angeles Don Knabe Supervisor, 4th District, County of Los Angeles Ara J. Najarian Mayor, City of Glendale Francine Oschin Robert T. Bartlett

Richard Dixon Mayor, City of Lake Forest

EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS
Lou Bone Mayor, City of Tustin

Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG)

Beatrice Proo

Maureen Micheline Transportation Deputy Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (Metro)

San Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG) State of California
Dale E. Bonner Secretary, Business, Transportation and Housing Agency Doug Failing, Director Caltrans – District 7

Editor: Denise Tyrrell • Design: HWDS and Associates, Inc. • Copywriting: Cheryl Downey HW1554—11/07

